life is short it's ending one minute at
a time why waste it on fulfilling other
people's expectations this is just one
of those questions presented in a novel
written by Chuck Palahniuk named Fight
Club the film version of Fight Club
directed by David Fincher starring Brad
Pitt Edward Norton and Helena Bonham
Carter could be considered one of the
best and most impactful movies ever made
when looking at its reception and
ongoing popularity Fight Club isn't shy
of over-the-top violence contains a fair
amount of explicit language and of
course the obnoxious behavior of its
characters however it's definitely more
profound than just men coming together
to beat each other up the story is built
on several thoughtful concepts that are
interesting and possibly applicable to
our own lives it tells a story about a
generation of people without a clear
purpose without hope raised with false
expectations and repressed by
ever-tightening social norms what if our
existence is pointless what if God
doesn't like us whatever nothing more
than a compost heap how do we find
meaning in a meaningless existence this
video explores several philosophical
ideas that Fight Club presents us for
those who aren't familiar with the story
this analysis explains and reveals the
plot
[Music]
the story of Fight Club revolves around
three main characters it's told from a
first-person perspective by a nameless
character that's commonly called the
narrator who has a dad and white-collar
job at a major car company and has
fallen prey to what he calls the IKEA
nesting instinct dictated by social
norms
he walks perfectly in line like a docile
sheep which translates into an
inauthentic repetitive and empty life he
suffers from a bad case of insomnia
which causes him to be neither fully
awake nor fully asleep sometimes he
entertains self-destructive thoughts as
he flies around from state to state for
his job he prays for a crash or mid-air
collision every time the plane banks to
sharply on takeoff or landing during a
flight he meets an eccentric and hyper
masculine character named Tyler Durden
Tyler seems to be the direct opposite of
the narrator he's a wolf rather than a
sheep disentangled from society and
impervious to social norms he takes what
he wants without asking and whenever he
pleases is self-sufficient has no
superiors and doesn't care about
material possessions the movie later
reveals that Tyler and a narrator are
the same person as Tyler is a product of
the narrator's imagination that's
probably induced by severe insomnia
combined with dissatisfaction with a
dull meaningless existence and a
lifetime of repressed urges the narrator
is addicted to going to support groups
for specific illnesses because these
give him the opportunity to cry which
seems to be a remedy for his insomnia
the downside of his behavior is that he
isn't genuine he has no testicular
cancer or blood parasites yet acts as if
he does so he can reap the benefits of
these sessions but these benefits come
to an end when another non genuine
visitor starts to join the sessions as
well this is a woman named Marla singer
and her motive for joining this session
is and I quote it's cheaper than a movie
and there's free coffee Marla is a self
destructive change smoking fatalist who
is expecting to die at any moment
but finds it tragic that it never
happens she steals food and clothes for
a living and attempts suicide by
overdosing sanics even though the
narrator Tyler and Marla have totally
different personalities they all lived
their lives
accompanied by a nihilistic undercurrent
Tyler seems to have figured out what
causes this emptiness and during the
course of the story his solution and
fault and fortunately his character
slides from a sage like father figure to
an anarchist terrorist with how to
destroy modern civilization nevertheless
he exposes a series of harsh realities
about a modern life that are worth
contemplating the anti-consumerist
stands of tyler durden becomes obvious
when he verbalizes his concern about a
modern way of life shortly after the
narrator meets Tyler he discovers that
his apartment went up in flames after
this unfortunate event realizing that he
has no friends to call he calls Tyler
the two meet and a narrator complains
about losing his furniture and his
respectable and almost complete wardrobe
Tyler responds rather in differently and
slightly sarcastically before he begins
to express his views on the matter I
quote where consumers we are byproducts
of a lifestyle obsession murder crime
poverty these things don't concern me
what concerns me are celebrity magazines
television with 500 channels some guy's
name on my underwear
Rogaine viagra olestra and quote it
becomes clear that Tyler has quite an
unconventional view of what's good and
bad murder crime and poverty are
generally considered bad things while
consumer goods like televisions clothing
from a certain brand products that help
to hide Aging enhance bedroom
performance and help us with weight loss
are considered preferable Tyler has a
contempt for the artificial as opposed
to elements
have been a natural part of the human
condition probably as long as we exist
this way of thinking touches upon an
ancient cynic philosopher named Diogenes
of Sinope II who believed that modern
civilized life hinders our natural state
at the end of the movie it appears that
a narrator has destroyed his apartment
himself when he was taken over by his
alter ego Tyler Durden this deed was the
first step onto the road of detachment
from his property into a more authentic
way of life and to how Tyler puts it
reject the basic assumptions of
civilization especially the importance
of material possessions
the narrator moves in with Tyler who
lives in a dilapidated house with
ongoing leaks power failures and no IKEA
furniture slowly but surely the narrator
indeed detaches from his previously
destroyed property things you own end up
owning you Tyler tells him and the
simple piece of wisdom probably hits
home when the narrator realizes that he
doesn't need all these worldly goods and
is actually much happier without them
Tyler Durden is a nonconformist and
shows again similarities with Diogenes
who not only purposefully lived in
poverty but also rejected social norms
for him social constructs are nothing
more than a superficial layer of culture
that represses our true nature
Diogenes lived in a barrel Tyler lives
in an abandoned building
Diogenes urinated in public Tyler
urinates in the soup of a restaurant
Diogenes bit his opponents like a dog
Tyler salivates over them using his own
blood the narrator on the other hand
seems to be the embodiment of conformity
as he adapts his lifestyle completely to
societal expectations the problem with
this behavior is that we dedicate our
existence walking the paths that people
other than ourselves have laid out for
us this need to conform this fear of
falling by the wayside this sickly
preoccupation by what others think of us
this necessity to keep up with the
Joneses what an exhausting way of life
just to feel accepted so what if we stop
caring what if we reject the generally
accepted norms and choose our own values
elect our own leaders determine our own
goals regardless of the social
expectations this is a fundamental
difference between the narrator and
Tyler Durden who puts it like this I am
free in all the ways that you are not
ironically later on in the story project
man a terrorist organization led by
Tyler that grows out of Fight Club is a
textbook example of conformity as its
members wear the same clothes are
absolutely equal abolish their names and
are referred to as space monkeys that
sacrifice their lives for a greater
cause we could say that by rejecting one
doctrine in order to be nonconformist we
often imprison ourselves in another one
fighting any experience of pain play a
significant role in Fight Club at the
beginning of the story
Tyler asks the narrator to hit him as
hard as he can he explains his strange
wish by saying how can you know yourself
if you've never been in a fight I don't
want to die without any scars and quote
so the narrator hits him
Tyler hits him back and the two engage
in a fistfight both seem to feel
surprisingly pleasant afterward and
decide to do it again their nightly
activities on a parking lot attract the
attention of other men that are also
interested in joining these non hostile
fistfights and thus Fight Club is born
it's widely known that a voluntary
exposure to certain forms of pain make
us stronger in the face of adversity
which could be a legit reason to partake
in these fights as the narrator state
after fighting everything else in your
life got the volume turned down
however Fight Club is more than just a
metaphor for dealing with hardship
through exposure a physical fight and
the violence and aggression that goes
with it resonates with the primal part
of our being not only the men in the
story are attracted to the violence of
fighting Fight Club as a movie and novel
was so impactful on its audience that
real-life fight clubs started to emerge
the story shows an experiment in which
the members of Fight Club pick fights
with random strangers and are supposed
to lose which isn't as easy as it sounds
most people do everything to avoid
physical conflict now this video is in
no way intended to endorse violence but
Fight Club makes us wonder if it's a
good thing that we've lost touch with
these primal tendencies should we
repress this part of human nature or
perhaps integrate it in healthy and
constructive ways
when the story progresses Tyler and a
narrator began to see the world through
a different lens
Tyler criticizes the modern
self-improvement type by saying
self-improvement is masturbation now
self-destruction this statement is
slightly confusing as the increasingly
destructive nature of Fight Club
we're faces are permanently mutilated
and teeth are knocked out of people's
heads doesn't seem to be a sustainable
way to live but Tyler might be on to
something when we look at self
destruction as the destruction of a
false self self improvement often points
to the accumulation of external goods a
better house a better job a better body
more money but why should we endlessly
want to improve ourselves why can't we
just be happy with how things are and
take life as it comes
or stiler States I say never be complete
I say stop being perfect
I say let's evolve let the chips fall
where they may and quote we create an
identity through material wealth and
social status and as far as Tyler is
concerned this false sense of self must
be destroyed before we are free to do
anything we want
therefore project mames space monkeys
live by a mantra which goes like this
you are not your job you're not how much
money you have in the bank you are not
the car you drive
you're not the contents of your wallet
you're notch of khakis you are all
singing all dancing crap of the world
end quote
Tyler makes a so-called human sacrifice
namely a man called a Raymond who works
a dead-end job in a convenience store
Raymond wanted to be a veterinarian but
didn't make it because it was quote
unquote
too much studying Tyler threatens
Raymond saying that if he doesn't start
studying within six weeks he'll kill him
in this scene
Tyler points to another aspect of
self-destruction the act of letting go
of fears negative self-talk and all
distractions so we can fully focus on
our purpose it's the destruction of
everything within ourselves that holds
us back
from living life on our own terms many
people go great lengths when it comes to
pain avoidance the problem is that
running from pain means running from an
inevitable part of life the prospect of
incurring pain makes us anxious and
often leads to hedonistic decisions that
is choosing the less painful path even
if a more painful path guarantees more
success and pleasure in the future Tyler
Durden deals with this by inflicting a
chemical wound on the narrator's hand
using a lie
as expected the narrator does everything
to escape the pain he uses visualization
techniques he learned at a seminar and
retreating in his cave to find his
quote-unquote power animal but Tyler
slaps him in the face forcing him to
stay with the pain saying this is the
greatest moment of your life man and
you're off somewhere missing it end
quote for the narrator Tyler has one
central goal he must reach bottom after
putting him through suffering and
destroying his false identity
there's yet an other aspect that must be
crushed hope losing all hope is freedom
and therefore he must reject what has
rejected him his father and God I quote
consider the possibility that God does
not like you in all probability he hates
you and quote Tyler states that we don't
need God that we shouldn't care about
Redemption and damnation and if we're
God's unwanted children so be it thereby
we lose all hope but are also liberated
from religious doctrine and fatherly
Authority now we're truly free now we
can create our own meaning and live how
we want to live Tyler emphasizes the
importance of knowing what we want in
life to achieve this we must be willing
to get out of our comfort zone and jump
into the unknown without safety bracket
the narrator however has difficulties
letting go of security
he backs Tyler to not mess around when
he lets go of the steering wheel in a
driving car while hitting the gas
Tyler calls the narrator pathetic and
yells hitting bottom isn't a weekend
retreat it's not a goddamn seminar stop
trying to control everything and just
let go after an inevitable car crash
Tyler states that I just had a near life
experience Fight Club is a story about
rebellion against the status quo and a
plea for the simple life it criticizes
the ways in which we are so hung up on
security and material possessions and
how people at social norms dictate their
lives stuff has become our religion the
idols we worship are IKEA and Starbucks
and the more we immerse ourselves in
such an empty and unfulfilled existence
the more we start to resemble the things
that we produce manufactured products
rather than authentic human beings Tyler
shows us a way out and even though his
insights are profound the execution is
questionable Fight Club and its
terrorist branch Project Mayhem show us
how easy it is to oppose one ideology in
order to fall into another and how a
cult-like echo chamber built on rigid
beliefs could become very destructive
nevertheless Tyler challenges us to be
self-sufficient and disobedient to the
authorities that let us down to live
authentically and in a moment to
confront our fears to boldly step out of
our comfort zones and let the things
that don't matter
truly slide thank you for watching
[Music]